Hello everyone! In this lesson, we have an independent work - it is necessary to program the running animation.
The character should run while holding down the shift key and holding down the forward key.
If any of the keys are released, then it must either move calmly or stand still.
I will give you a quick introduction before you start. In the project settings, in the input, we have to create a new action mapping - Run.
And assign a value to the Left Shift key, or whatever key you want.
Next, in AnimGraph, we need to add a new state called Run.
And make the transitions from the state walk to run and back. And you can also jump from the Run state.
The animation for running is called RoadieRun_Fwd. And the last thing you have to
deal with is the dynamic change in the character's movement speed. In the character movement component, the
MaxWalkSpeed ​​variable is responsible for this. When running, the character should naturally move faster.
You can pause here. In the continuation of the video, there will be a solution to this problem.
Well, let's check how our implementations will differ from each other.
Let's create a new action mapping and call it Run.
And add the left shift key.
With the left shift key held down, our character will run.
And go to visual studio.
We start by creating the function that we need to handle the left shift key press.
We call the first function OnStartRunning.
The second function is called OnStopRunning.
The first function will be called when the left shift key is pressed and the second when it is released.
We create a body for each function.
We do bind for these functions.
If the key is pressed, then the OnStartRunning function is called, and if the key is released, then OnStopRunning.
The enum element that is responsible for releasing the key is called IE_Released.
We need to understand whether our key is pressed, which is responsible for running or not. To do this, we
will create an additional variable in the .h file that will be responsible for this.
Move to the private section, create a boolean variable. We call it WantsToRun. Roughly speaking, holding
down the shift key is only a necessary condition for running, because perhaps we have not pressed the forward key
and then our character should not run, so we call the variable WantsToRun.
And we assign in the OnStartRunning function the value true for this variable, and in OnStopRunning, respectively, false.
Next, you and I must determine that our character is running forward. This can be done in
several ways. In the most general case, you can calculate the angle between the velocity vector and the vector
where our character is looking. And by the value of this angle, determine the direction of running.
We only have one running animation - the forward running animation, so our implementation will be a little simpler.
Let's create an additional flag in the .h file that will be responsible for whether our character is running forward or not.
Let's name it IsMovingForward and set it to false by default.
We return to the .cpp file.
We pass into the MoveForward function and the value of our variable will be equal to true if and only if the
Amount value is greater than zero, that is, the key is pressed, which is responsible for moving forward.
And the last thing left for us to do is add a function that we will call from our
animation blueprint. The function will return true when our character is running and false when not running.
Therefore, we define the UFUNCTION macro. The first specifier will be BlueprintCallable.
Because we want it to be available in blueprints. Next, let's create a category for this function, let it be Movement.
Our function returns a boolean value, let's call it IsRunning.
We add the const specifier - our function will not change any data inside.
We create the body of our function.
So, we calculate the value at which our function returns true. Firstly, the condition
that the shift key is pressed and, secondly, our character must move forward.
Additionally, let us check that the actor's velocity vector is not zero. To do this, we take the velocity vector of the GetVelocity actor
and check it against 0. It is better to add this check. A situation is possible when we press
the forward key, and the vector is not added to AddMovementInput. And yet our IsMovingForward variable is true.
For example, this can happen when our character is trapped or stuck somewhere.
And by checking the speed, we are 100 percent convinced that he is in motion.
Go to the animated blueprint of the character in EventGraph.
Let's start by changing Cast to ACharacter to Cast
to our specific character class, because the IsRunning function is in our class.
With Ctrl held down, we can drag the strings in the blueprints. This is quite convenient.
So we will definitely not forget anything. We call our IsRunning function.
We create a variable that will store a boolean value: is
our character running or not. We also call it IsRunning.
We're done with EventGraph. Let's go back to the animation graph. Into our state machine.
So, from the walk state we can get into our new state, which we will call Run,
provided that the IsRunning variable becomes true.
Create a reverse transition from run to walk. Jump conditions - IsRunning becomes false. We use NOT.
And the last transition. When we run, we can press the jump key.
Therefore, we make the transition from run to JumpStart and the transition condition coincides
with the condition of the transition from the walk state to the JumpStart state. We can duplicate this condition
in our new TransitionRule. But we'll do it a little trickier. Click on IsFalling.
Go to the details panel, to the property TransitionRuleSharing. Click on PromoteToShared.
And in the field we enter IsFalling. In fact, we made a function from TransitionRule that can be reused.
We also notice that the transition arrow and the circle are colored red. This is an indicator
that the TransitionRule is shared and we change the TransitionRule from Run to JumpStart in the same property
Click on UsedShared. We choose IsFalling. Click on it. The condition is exactly the same.
We just need to substitute the animation in the Run state.
We go to the content browser. Let's rename our BlendSpace Locomotion to LocomotionWalk.
Press Ctrl + W. Copy the BlendSpace and name the new asset BlendSpaceRun.
Open up our BlendSpaceRun and all we need to do is replace the 600 speed animation with
the RoadieRun_Fwd asset. The speed of course we will have more than 600, but in general it does not matter to us,
because the speed value in the asset will not exceed 600. The animation at large values ​​will be played with a value of 600.
Save the asset. Go back to our animation graph and drag the BlendSpaceRun.
We connect the node to OutputAnimationPose and also connect the speed.
Compile. Checking what we have done. We start to run. Hold shift. The animation has changed.
We run, we jump, we continue to run. Everything is working. Now let's make it so that the speed of our character
changes as we run . Now it is the same for normal movement and for running. It doesn't look great.
In our implementation, this will be done using the character's own motion component.
Let's create a class for our component.
Click on the show all classes checkbox and enter the CharacterMovementComponent in the search. We create an inheritor of this class.
Click the next button. Let's call it STUCharacterMovementComponent.
Let's create it in the components directory.
Click the create class button.
Go to the build file. Add our path to the Components folder
to PublicIncludePaths .
Next, go to .h of the motion component we created. Press f12 on the base class.
And we find the GetMaxSpeed ​​function. This function returns the maximum speed of the character.
Let's redefine it in our component. Create a public section and copy
the GetMaxSpeed ​​function declaration. Created in the .h file and go to the .cpp file. We create the body of the GetMaxSpeed ​​function.
Create a variable MaxSpeed ​​and assign it the value of the parent function GetMaxSpeed.
And just return that value. That is, so far, our function does not make any changes with MaxSpeed.
So I forgot the float. We must somehow get a pointer to our character,
check whether he is running or not. And depending on this value, change the MaxSpeed.
First, let's include the header file of our STUBaseCharacter. Create a pointer to our character.
Let's call it Player. We write Cast right away, because the component stores a pointer only to the pawn class.
We will need to convert this pointer to ASTUBaseCharacter. The component class has a special
function that returns a pointer to the owner of the given component. The function is called GetPawnOwner.
It returns a pointer to pawn. First, let's check that the pointer is not nullptr.
Next, we check that our character is running. To do this, we call the function that we created IsRunning.
Let me remind you that in C ++ this construction is correct, because if the first condition is false, then the second condition is
not evaluated by the && operator. Next, we use the ternary operator?
If the condition is to the left of? right, then we have to multiply MaxSpeed ​​by some RunModifier parameter,
which we will create now. Next comes the colon. If the condition is not true, then we simply return the MaxSpeed ​​value.
Changing the speed could be implemented in another way, for example, create two additional
variables in the character class. One of them would be responsible for the speed when walking, and the other when running.
And depending on whether our character is running or not, we could supply the MaxSpeed ​​value in the motion component.
But in that case, we would have code duplication, because MaxSpeed ​​is already present in the CharacterMovementComponent.
Let's create a property for the RunModifier. Go to the public section. We write UPROPERTY.
We set the specifier EditDefaultsOnly. We will change this variable
only in the default settings of our character. Next, we write BlueprintReadWrite.
Let's also add a category for property - Movement.
The variable will be of the float type and by default let it be 2, that is, the speed while running
will double. Here we may have a small problem: if someone in the blueprint
sets the value of this variable to zero, or to some negative value, then the speed of our
character will change in a completely different way than we intended. Property has a mechanism that
helps to get rid of these situations. We can specify two qualifiers in the meta information. One of them is ClampMin,
which indicates the minimum allowable value for this variable in the blueprint.
Let's put, for example, 1.5. And the second specifier is ClampMax, which sets the maximum assignment this variable
can have . Let it be 10. The last thing to do is to change the UCharacterMovementComponent
class in the character class to our USTUCharacterMovementComponent.
We include the header file of our component in the .cpp file ASTUBaseCharacter.
In order to explicitly specify the class for the UCharacterMovementComponent, we will use a
special kind of constructor with a parameter, into which the initialization object is passed.
This object is of type FObjectInitializer.
Copy the constructor signature. Insert into the .cpp file.
We must also call the parent class constructor. We use Super. We pass our
initialization object ObjInit there and immediately call the function called SetDefaultSubobjectClass.
This is a templated function. It takes as a template parameter the class of the subobject
we want to replace. In this case, it is USTUCharacterMovementComponent.
This function also has one argument. This is the name of the component.
We need to provide a name for the component. The name is in a static variable of the character base class
called CharacterMovementComponentName. Moreover, there are also similar variables with component names
for the mesh component and for the capsule component. SetDefaultSubobjectClass returns the FObjectInitializer object,
so the record we made takes place, that is, Super is essentially a modified ObjInit object.
Click play. Checking. We hold shift and our character has a modified speed when running
, that is, he moves faster. Opening up our blueprint. Select the motion component in the component tree.
We see that the class has changed to USTUCharacterMovementComponent.
Go to the details panel. Find RunModifier in the Movement category and see that our variable is limited to a
minimum of 1.5 and a maximum of 10. Let's compile the blueprint at 10
and see how much faster our character moves. Thus, we have implemented the
running mechanics, set up the animations. At the same time, you can compare how your implementation differs from mine.
Naturally, it is different. There are many options for implementation. This is normal. This concludes the lesson.